+++
date = '2025-03-28T19:18:01-04:00'
title = 'Values Part 1: Kindness'
tags = ["personal"]
+++

My personal values are, in order:
  1. Kindness
  2. Integrity
  3. Justice

<!--more-->

"Values" means different things to different people; for me, values
are first of all guidelines that help me when the correct decision or
action isn't clear to me. They're also a communication tool: when I
tell someone my values it tells them what is important to me and what
they can expect from me. They also signal what my priorities are going
to be when these values conflict with each other.

Of course, these are "big" words in the sense that they encompass a
lot of potential meaning. Everyone is likely to have at least slightly
different opinions about what "Kindness" or "Integrity" means, and
understandings of the meaning of "Justice" seem to be extraordinarily
different (and contentious) between different people.

In this series of posts, I'd like to share with you what these words
mean to me, starting with:

### Kindness
Kindness is about being generous and considerate. When you are
kind, you are extending people grace and empathy. Kindness lies in
choosing the words and actions that will soothe and uplift rather than
harm. When you are acting out of kindness, you are sharing the good
things in life and helping to shoulder the burdens. In order to be
kind, you must do kind acts without expecting praise or reward beyond
intrinsic satisfaction.

Kindness is also about extending the benefit of the doubt. When you
are acting out of kindness you are assuming that others are sincere
rather than insincere; doing the best they can rather than acting out
of malice. I personally find that operating from this base assumption
of goodwill is also very effective at managing when others are not at
their best. On more than one occasion I've presented someone who was
clearly not operating out of goodwill with the confidence that I
believed they were, and have seen them change course to match those
expectations. This can be a useful technique to head off conflict
before it fully manifests.

It's also important to clarify what kindness is **not**. There are
many things which may seem kind on the surface, but are ultimately
unkind or even harmful. Sheltering someone from a difficult truth
_can_ be kind, but it usually is not in the long run. Being "nice" is
not the same as being kind. To quote a personal role model, [Charity
Majors](https://bsky.app/profile/charity.wtf/post/3lku52ef4kc2n):

> Kind isn't always comfortable. For either of you.[^1]

It is also often unkind to shield someone from the consequences of
their actions. On the one hand it *feels* kind to protect someone from
something unpleasant... and it is! But you also have to consider
whether it is kind to rob them of an important learning
opportunity. Sometimes the greater kindness is to allow them to
experience the discomfort of learning.

Valuing kindness so highly makes me an excellent leader and a terrible
manager. While I believe great managers need kindness, it's also true
that the role of management often requires managers to put other
concerns ahead of kindness. As a technical leader, however, I have yet
to encounter a situation where I needed to prioritize anything ahead
of kindness. Grounding my leadership in kindness enables me to build
rapport with the team(s) I lead. It gives them a sense of
psychological safety that allows them to share concerns, admit
mistakes or weaknesses, and ask questions freely. It gives them
confidence that they can ask me for help and I will provide it. These
are all critical to building the trust and respect required to provide
technical leadership.

You might be wondering: why put kindness above every other value? It's
a good question! You might make a different choice and that's
fantastic! For me, it comes down to a synthesis of my experiences, my
beliefs, and the world I want to live in. From my childhood onward, I
have experienced both inhuman levels of unkindness and breathtaking
acts of kindness. Both have carved themselves into me. I went through
a time when the cruelty I had encountered was leading me to harden
myself. As I allowed unkindness to shape me, I found myself behaving
unkindly. I started to dislike the person I was. I started to see how
it was conflicting with my beliefs. I realized that the unkindness
was, in a way, using me to project **more** of itself into the
world.

I decided I don't want to live in a world that becomes increasingly
less kind.

Choosing kindness as my highest principle reminds me of the world I
want to live in. It is a daily affirmation of my own personal
responsibility in creating a kinder world. It gives me a concrete way
to align my actions to my belief that the world will be improved
through kindness.

I've enjoyed this opportunity to make my thoughts on kindness more
concrete. I've long understood what I valued, but until now I haven't
put that understanding into words in a way I can share with
others. Putting your thoughts into language is a powerful process to
find the edges of your understanding. In future posts I will explore
integrity and justice through a similar lens. I hope you'll enjoy the
journey with me!

[^1]: Do read the rest of that thread, Charity goes on to give more insight
about psychological safety and conflict avoidance.
